#Java Platform Vs. Java Programming Language

Before I start talking about writing Java programs, it's probably worthwhile to say a quick word about the difference between the Java platform and the Java programming language. If you want a highly technical explanation, I recommend going to the Wikipedia articles on [the Java platform](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_(software_platform)) and [the Java programming language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_(programming_language));

I'll also explain the differences between the JDK (Java Development Kit) and the JRE (Java Runtime Environment) as well as the purpose of the JVM (Java Virtual Machine). Understanding these differences won't help you write your first program, but it may help you understand *why* you'd want to use Java in the first place and provide you with a deeper understanding of Java in general.

##Protability
For a more technical and complete discussion of protability, here is [the Wikipedia article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_portability).

In everyday language, we use the term *portable* to describe those things that can be easily transported from one place to another. My luggage, for example, is portable; a house, a giant boulder, and my cousin Louis are much less so.

The same applies to software. Some programs are more portable than others. Most programs will work on computers that share the same operating system. For example, if I were to develop a computer game using C++ on Windows, I would be able to create an executable file (my_awesome_game.exe) and give it to other people with Windows computers. However, if I gave the same file to someone with a Mac, it would be of no use to them. In this sense, programs usually have limited portability in that they can (more or less) only be shared among computers with the same operating system--note: there are issues of processor instruction sets to consider as well. Another easy example is an iPhone app. While iPhone apps tend to work on all iPhones (because iPhones have the iOS operating system), they don't work on Android phones.

In my opinion, the best thing about Java is that Java programs--which aren't necessarily written in the Java programming language--are far more portable than a lot of other programs. Any computer with the JRE (Java Runtime Environment)--which is essentially the Java "platform"--should be able to run a Java program. That is, you can write a program in Java and it should work on Windows, Mac, Android, iOS, and any other operating system that has the JRE installed.

##How Java Programs Work: Byte Code, The JRE and The JVM
Java programs, which may or may not be written in the Java programming language, are written as plain text.

**Example Program in Java Programming Language**
```java
public class HelloWorld {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    System.out.println("Hello, World");
  }
}
```

**Example Program in JRuby**
```ruby
puts "Hello World"
```

The next step is to *compile* a program to turn it into a form the computer can actually use. This can be done with any [JVM language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_JVM_languages), not just the Java programming language. "Normal" programming languages like C++ compile into "machine language" code, which, as previously discussed, isn't all that portable. Java programs, which are more portable, don't compile into machine language. Instead, they compile into *byte code*.

The trick employed by Java programs that makes them portable is that byte code is not run directly by the processor of the computer as machine code would be. Instead, another program called the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) runs the byte code. This trick is what allows Java programs to be portable. As long as a computer has the JVM installed on it, that computer can run byte code.

###What is the JRE?
The JRE (Java Runtime Environment) is really just the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) that runs byte code and some other "stuff" that Java programs need to run, such as the Java API, but I'll discuss that later. Just realize that the JRE is essentially the Java Platform that is able to run byte code, which may or may not have been generated by compiling a program written in the Java programming language.

Another important point to make about the JRE is that it does some nice things for programmers, one of which is called *garbage collection*. In "normal" programming language, say C++, you would have to be very careful about how you use the computer's memory. If you add something into memory, you had better remember to delete it when you aren't using it anymore or bad things will happen. Java takes care of this memory management problem for you by automatically "collecting the garbage* (i.e., deleting the stuff you don't need anymore).

##Interpreted Languages
You may be thinking of the World Wide Web and be realizing that websites are exceptionally portable. They work on any computer with a Web browser (IE, Safari, Chrome, Firefox, Opera) installed. Webpages are an interesting mix of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. While HTML and CSS are not what I'd consider programming languages, JavaScript is. However, JavaScript belongs to a special group of highly-portable programming languages called *interpreted languages*, which is what I'll briefly discuss in this section. The reason I started this section talking about webpages was simply to point out that there are other common ways, besides Java, of developing highly portable applications on computers.

Other examples of interpreted languages besides JavaScript include Python and Ruby. Similar to how Java uses the a special program (i.e., the JVM) to run byte code, interpreted languages use a special program (i.e., the interpreter, which in the case of JavaScript is the Web browser) to run their plain text code. Unlike how things work in Java, interpreted languages don't need to be compiled at all. For example, I can write a program in Python and run it with the Python interpreter without ever compiling the program. This convenience usually results in programs written in interpreted languages running a bit more slowly.

###APIs
As a programmer, you will quickly become familiar with many parts of the Java API, and you may be confused about what an API is. This is my brief and humble attempt at an explanation for you. If you keep in mind the differences between Java, interpreted languages, and "normal" languages, this explanation should make sense.

The term API (Application Programming Interface) is used whenever a programming language interfaces with another piece of running software. In the case in the case of Java is the JVM. In this way, all interpreted languages also have APIs because they interface with their own interpreters. The JavaScript programming language is especially interesting in the way it interfaces with the DOM (Data Object Model) used for webpages. Anyway, a traditional programming language like C++ or Fortran does not have an API like Java, Python, and Ruby do.

